This is Jacob's Research Journal. Today's deep dive: The Loop
Is Closing — Recursive Self-Improvement Has Left the Lab. Ninety
percent of Claude's code is written by Claude. Not by
the engineers at Anthropic who designed the model, but by
a previous version of the model itself — iterating on
its own codebase, proposing changes, testing them, shipping them. An
Anthropic spokesperson told Fortune that company-wide, the figure for A-I-generated
code is between seventy and ninety percent. At some leading
engineers' desks at both Anthropic and OpenAI, it's reportedly one
hundred percent. That number alone should stop you. It means
the tools that are reshaping entire industries are increasingly built
not by human hands but by earlier versions of themselves.
The concept has a name that has bounced around A-I
safety circles for decades — recursive self-improvement, or R-S-I —
and as of spring twenty twenty-six, it has migrated from
philosophical thought experiment to operational reality at every major A-I
laboratory on earth. Now let's talk about where this idea
came from — and how fast it became real. The
idea is older than most people realize. In nineteen sixty-five,
the British mathematician I. J. Good described what he called
an intelligence explosion — an ultra-intelligent machine that could design
even better machines, creating a feedback loop where, quote, "the
intelligence of man would be left far behind." For sixty
years this remained a theoretical curiosity, the kind of thing
discussed at philosophy conferences and in science fiction novels. It
is not theoretical anymore. At the World Economic Forum in
Davos this January, the C-E-Os of the two companies arguably
closest to the frontier — Dario Amodei of Anthropic and
Demis Hassabis of Google DeepMind — both spoke publicly about
pursuing self-improvement research. Hassabis was strikingly direct. He said: "It
remains to be seen — can that self-improvement loop that
we're all working on — actually close, without a human
in the loop." The phrasing is worth sitting with. Not
"whether we should work on this" but "whether the loop
we're building can close." The decision to pursue R-S-I, at
DeepMind at least, appears to have already been made. Anthropic's
position is, if anything, more aggressive. Amodei predicted at Davos
that the industry may be six to twelve months away
from A-I handling most or all of software engineering from
start to finish. His company's own chief scientist, Jared Kaplan,
has been more explicit about what comes after that. He
told Control A-I that humans will face an "extremely high-risk
decision" between twenty twenty-seven and twenty thirty — whether to
allow A-I systems to independently train and develop the next
generation of A-I. Kaplan called this "the ultimate risk." Note
the tension: Anthropic's chief scientist publicly calls the thing his
company is building "the ultimate risk," while the company continues
building it. Now let's look at the lab race —
because every major frontier lab has a concrete timeline for
automating its own research. The specificity is new, and striking.
OpenAI has been the most explicit. C-E-O Sam Altman announced
internal goals of having an "automated A-I research intern" by
September twenty twenty-six, running on hundreds of thousands of G-P-Us,
and "a true automated A-I researcher" by March twenty twenty-eight.
Altman added a caveat — "We may totally fail at
this goal" — but followed it with a justification that
reveals how seriously the company takes it: "given the extraordinary
potential impacts we think it is in the public interest
to be transparent about this." Chief scientist Jakub Pachocki described
this target as "a system capable of autonomously delivering on
larger research projects." Anthropic is tracking toward what it calls
"fully automated A-I research" by twenty twenty-seven. Dario Amodei has
cited something like four hundred percent efficiency improvements per year
from optimization work — coding, architecture tweaks, infrastructure engineering —
creating a compound effect where identical compute yields dramatically better
results each cycle. Dean Ball, a senior fellow at the
Foundation for American Innovation, calls this a "compute multiplier." An
anonymous Anthropic employee captured the aspiration with uncomfortable clarity: "We
want Claude n to build Claude n-plus-one, so we can
go home and knit sweaters." Google DeepMind has taken a
more measured public posture while publishing the most concrete technical
results. AlphaEvolve, unveiled in May twenty twenty-five, is an evolutionary
coding agent that uses Gemini to generate, mutate, and select
algorithmic improvements in a self-reinforcing loop. The results are not
speculative: AlphaEvolve has improved Flash Attention operations by thirty-two percent,
achieved a twenty-three percent speedup in kernel tiling for A-I
training, and continuously recovers zero point seven percent of Google's
entire worldwide compute resources. That last number sounds small until
you consider Google's scale. Zero point seven percent of their
compute is a staggering amount of freed capacity, running continuously,
discovered by an A-I optimizing A-I infrastructure. Meta published a
December twenty twenty-five preprint explicitly aimed at using self-improvement techniques
to build superintelligence. The paper, notably, contained no mention of
safety or ethics. Meanwhile, Meta's former chief A-I scientist Yann
LeCun left the company in late twenty twenty-five to found
A-M-I Labs, raising one point zero three billion dollars at
a three and a half billion dollar valuation — the
largest seed-stage investment in European history. LeCun's departure is the
highest-profile dissent from the R-S-I consensus: he's betting that the
self-improvement loop, as currently conceived, runs into fundamental limits. And
the loop isn't limited to software. Ricursive Intelligence, founded by
former DeepMind researchers, raised three hundred million dollars at a
four billion dollar valuation less than two months after emerging
from stealth. Their thesis: A-I designs the silicon that powers
the next generation of A-I. The loop extends all the
way down to the hardware. Now, let's talk about what
I'm calling the Karpathy Moment. If the lab race is
R-S-I behind closed doors, Andrej Karpathy blew the doors open.
In March twenty twenty-six, the former Tesla A-I director and
OpenAI co-founder released Auto Research — a six hundred thirty
line Python script, open source under M-I-T license, that demonstrates
autonomous A-I self-improvement on a single G-P-U. The concept is
deceptively simple. Give an A-I agent a small but real
language model training setup. Let it experiment autonomously — modifying
the training code, running a five-minute training run, checking whether
the loss improved, keeping or discarding the change, and repeating.
The human writes the prompt. The A-I iterates on the
code. After two days, Auto Research had processed approximately seven
hundred autonomous experiments, finding roughly twenty additive improvements that transferred
perfectly to larger models. The result: an eleven percent reduction
in the "Time to G-P-T two" benchmark, from two point
zero two hours to one point eight zero hours. Not
a theoretical improvement on a toy problem — an eleven
percent efficiency gain on training a real language model, discovered
entirely by machine. The repo went viral: eight point six
million views on X, over forty-two thousand GitHub stars within
days. More importantly, the pattern proved generalizable. Shopify C-E-O Tobi
Lütke applied the Auto Research loop to optimize rendering speed,
producing ninety-three automated commits that achieved fifty-three percent faster rendering
and sixty-one percent reduction in memory allocations. The message was
clear: this isn't just for A-I research. The self-improvement loop
works on anything you can score. Now let's turn to
the governance gap — because this is where the story
turns from impressive to unsettling. Dean Ball's policy analysis is
the sharpest available on this point. He identifies the current
state of affairs bluntly: there are no safety or security
standards for frontier models, no cybersecurity rules for frontier labs
or data centers, no requirements for explainability or testing for
A-I systems engineered by other A-I systems, and no specific
legal constraints on what frontier labs can do with the
results of recursive self-improvement. The academic community hasn't covered itself
in glory either. The I-C-L-R twenty twenty-six Workshop on A-I
with Recursive Self-Improvement — possibly the world's first academic workshop
dedicated entirely to R-S-I, scheduled for April twenty-sixth in Rio
de Janeiro — initially gave safety concerns minimal emphasis. When
journalists pressed the organizers, safety was subsequently added as "encouraged,
optional." Optional. David Scott Krueger, a University of Cambridge A-I
safety researcher, was less diplomatic: "It's completely wild and crazy
that this is happening, it's unconscionable." The paradox is stark.
The people closest to the technology freely acknowledge the risks.
Kaplan calls it "the ultimate risk." Hassabis wonders publicly whether
the loop can close safely. Altman hedges his timeline announcements
with notes about "extraordinary potential impacts." But the organizational incentive
is to keep building. Every lab operates under the same
competitive logic: if we don't build it first, someone else
will. The claim to responsibility, however, rests on safety infrastructure
that does not yet exist. Before getting swept up in
the intelligence explosion narrative, it's worth considering the skeptical case
— because there is one, and it's not trivial. LeCun's
bet against the R-S-I paradigm is the most prominent version.
His argument, simplified: current language models are prediction machines, not
reasoning engines. They can optimize within a paradigm — write
better code, tune hyperparameters, find efficiency gains — but they
cannot make the kind of paradigm-shifting conceptual leaps that transform
fields. Auto Research found a nice eleven percent improvement, but
it found it by iterating within an existing architecture, not
by inventing a new one. Ball frames this as his
"bearish scenario": A-I automation accelerates progress within existing paradigms, but
the acceleration looks like driving a car faster on a
highway rather than learning to fly. The economic impact is
enormous — automated research dramatically reduces costs and increases output
— but the intelligence explosion never actually detonates. There's also
a practical scaffolding problem. Current A-I agents excel at short-horizon
tasks — write a function, optimize a parameter, run an
experiment. But A-I research is not a sequence of short-horizon
tasks. It requires maintaining coherent research programs over weeks and
months, integrating results across subfields, recognizing when a dead end
is actually a new direction. OpenAI's September twenty twenty-six target
for an A-I "intern" is telling: even the most optimistic
lab distinguishes between grunt work and genuine research capability. This
skepticism deserves serious weight. But it faces a challenge: the
labs pursuing R-S-I have consistently delivered on aggressive timelines that
skeptics said were impossible. Two years ago, "A-I writes ninety
percent of its own code" would have been dismissed as
Silicon Valley fantasy. It's an Anthropic press statement now. So
what's actually at stake? The honest assessment, sitting with everything
the research turned up, is this: recursive self-improvement is the
most consequential development in A-I right now, and it is
happening with remarkably little public scrutiny. Ball predicts that during
twenty twenty-six, the effective "workforces" of each frontier lab will
grow from single-digit thousands to tens of thousands, and then
hundreds of thousands — most of them artificial. These workforces
will grow smarter each month, not only because A-I was
already improving rapidly but because their only objective will be
to make themselves smarter. Whether this produces a genuine intelligence
explosion or merely a very fast improvement within existing paradigms
is the most important empirical question in technology today. The
answer might not be knowable in advance. And that is
precisely the problem. Several concrete markers in the coming months
will signal how fast the loop is tightening. The I-C-L-R
R-S-I Workshop on April twenty-sixth — the first major academic
gathering focused entirely on recursive self-improvement. Whether safety gets real
attention or remains "optional" will reveal where the research community's
priorities actually lie. OpenAI's September twenty twenty-six target for an
automated A-I research intern. Anthropic's twenty twenty-seven horizon for fully
automated A-I research. And whether any jurisdiction moves beyond self-reporting
toward independent verification infrastructure. The absence of governance action is
itself a signal. I. J. Good's nineteen sixty-five thought experiment
ended with a sentence that has aged better than any
line in the history of technology forecasting: "Thus the first
ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that man need ever
make, provided that the machine is docile enough to tell
us how to keep it under control." Sixty-one years later,
the first half of that sentence is closer to reality
than most people understand. The second half — the part
about control — remains entirely unresolved. That's the recursive self-improvement
deep dive. Full post and sources at jacob brooke ninety-five
dot github dot i-o slash jacobs research journal. Thanks for
listening.